docs: Data Preprocessor ADR (#374)
foundation-model-stack/fms-hf-tuning: architecture_records/004-dataloader-v2.md

1. Support for mixing datasets based on static weights.

1. Support for streaming datasets (or Iterable Datasets in HuggingFace)

1. Support for chat template based masking

1. Tool Usage - for example using jinja templates in the datasets which require preprocessing of the data.

### Motivation

The current design of the data processing in fms-hf-tuning contains predefined use cases and support for a simple interface
to the users. While the simple interface provides ease of use over HuggingFace APIs it doesn't provide users any interface to define custom data preprocessing for e.g. in case of multi modal support. 

Ths motivation for this design is to implement the data preprocessor in a flexible way and expose to the users a powerful API which can allow them custom processing of data however they want, and at the same time have backwards compatibility retaining the simple interface of the existing API.

### User Benefit

### Simple User Perspective

For simple and base users of the code we want to retain the same functionality wherever possible i.e,
allow users to pass in a single data file and perform simple preprocessing.

> This means retaining the data arguments to the library which exist currently and ensuring that the appropriate processing required on the data is handeled internally.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means retaining the data arguments to the library which exist currently and ensuring that the appropriate processing required on the data is handled internally. This interface will be extended to support more data formats and the default preprocessing function will be selected internally. 

We will shortlist the data formats we want to provide implicit support for, based on product use cases. 
```

### Advanced User Perspective

> For advanced users we want to open up an argument to our library `data_config_file` which will take as input a data preprocesing config file specifying what preprocessing to apply on the data and in what order.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For advanced users who have custom preprocessing needs, we want to open up an argument to our library `data_config_file` which will take as input a data preprocesing config file specifying what preprocessing to apply on the data and in what order.
```

# Data Loader Design For FMS-HF-Tuning

**Deciders(s)**: Sukriti Sharma (sukriti.sharma4@ibm.com), Will Johnson (Will.Johnson@ibm.com) , Abhishek Maurya (maurya.abhishek@ibm.com), Dushyant Behl (dushyantbehl@in.ibm.com), Ashok Pon Kumar (ashokponkumar@in.ibm.com)

**Date (YYYY-MM-DD)**:  2024-03-06

**Obsoletes ADRs**:  NA

**Modified By ADRs**:  NA

**Relevant Issues**: [1]

- [Summary and Objective](#summary-and-objective)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [User Benefit](#user-benefit)
- [Decision](#decision)
  - [Alternatives Considered](#alternatives-considered)
- [Consequences](#consequences)
- [Detailed Design](#detailed-design)

## Summary and Objective

The reason for motivating dataloader design for fms-hf-tuning is to have a unified interface which supports many type of data formats, streaming and non streaming data, weight based data mixing and many others. Full list we focus on is below - 

1. Data Loading -

    1. Different formats of data → Arrow, Parquet etc.

    1. Different modalities of data -> Images, Audio etc.

    1. Streaming data.

    1. Data Replay

>     1. Resume with different number of GPUs

Reviewer: how is this going to happen with preprocessing?

Author: The implementation of data loader in the `fms-fsdp` supports resuming with different number of GPUs so when we add support for that dataloader we can pass additional args to the dataloader as the gpu number.

    1. Async data loading

1. Data Preprocessing - 

>     1. Custom Attn Masking

Reviewer 2: What is custom attn masking? attn masks are generally very slow and memory intensive, this is the reason why we use padding free where attention masks are not needed. So why do we want to use attention masks again?

Author: By custom attention masking we mean support for multi turn chat based data support which means custom part of input data to be masked or not...more likely done inside of the collators but keeping the design so we accept inputs accordingly to support such a use case. 

cc @ashokponkumar

Reviewer 2: @dushyantbehl can I clarify if you actually mean masking (which is to create an attention mask to say this token can only attend to this other token), or you mean loss masking which means to replace the losses with -100?

    1. Tool Usage

1. Data Mixing - 

    1. Static weights based mixing

### Motivation

### User Benefit

## Decision

### Alternatives Considered

## Consequences

### Advantages

### Impact on performance

## Detailed Design

The input spec which user specifies on how to pass information to such data loader is this

```

> dataloader:

Reviewer 2: Its not clear to me if this spec will be the default once this feature is merged in. If so, i urge to consider to maintain also the simpler earlier interface where you only need to pass a data path in. So users who do not need to have so complicated dataloader requirements do not need to go through the trouble to write the spec

Author: @fabianlim the idea is to keep the simpler interface while also have a detailed spec which can handle complex use cases and variour other requirements.

Reviewer 3: @dushyantbehl Is my understanding right that we can have a set of inbuilt data configs which people can trigger with say some flag? 

For example, we can have:
--data-config-name pretokenized
--data-config-data-path <path>

So that we don't have to maintain multiple data manipulation paths.

Reviewer: I think it would be even better if defaults could be selected automatically for simple file formats and use cases - users enter multimodal JSON and default handler is selected . only for users that want to modify it / have a complex use case, we also expose a way to do that

    type: default(hfdataloader)/stateful(fms-fsdp implementation)
    streaming: true
datasets:
  - name: dataset1
    sampling:

>       ratio: 0.3

Reviewer 2: @dushyantbehl @Ssukriti I feel the better design is not to expose so many fine grained configurations to the user. Consider the the typical use case for loading datasets

```python
from datasets import load_dataset
data = load_dataset("alpaca")
```

When users load a dataset, they just want to use it, they dont really want to care to set complicated flags like "streaming: True". 

In my experience, dataset preperation is very specialized skill. If you think about ILAB, the data is prepared  by the Cambridge team and we just take the tokens and train with it. As such, a recipe is prepared and given to regular users who just deal with the preprocessed data. Simple things like choosing the wrong chat template can severely degrade performance, so regular users wont even mess with that.

Thus in fms-hf-tuning, there is no way to pass such a reciepe, because users will have to set their own `response_template`, etc. I feel that this ADR should aim to provide these reciepes

However what this ADR is doing now is focusing a lot on these fine-detailed configs, which by my argument, a regular user will not mess with. I think we can take inspiration with how HF does these things with fine-grained configs 

```python
from transformers import AutoModelForCausaLMl
model = transformers.AutoModelForCausalLM("....")
```
this actually downloads a `config.json` with complicated model settings that users dont really look at, but is very important to the ensuing that the model is correctly built.

So then the analogue that we might want is

```python
from fms_datasets import load_datasets

# train_dataset is a torch.Dataset that can just be passed to trainer, it
# should be already processed (or can be processed on the fly)
train_dataset = load_datasets('....")

# if train_dataset is multimodal, then some things like
# tokenizer.apply_chat_template(train_dataset, tokenize=False) may not make sense anymore
# so this has to be considered in the ADR
```
where you point to a path with a fine-grained config, and it does the data prep completely for the user. 

Therefore with this abstraction, someone well-versed in dataset prep, will then 
- prepare and publish the fine-grained configs, and then pass them to regular users to be used
- the publisher of such configs, could be IBM, or could be power-users in the public 

Some thoughts:
- performance is key. The more configs you give to the user, the more you need to think about how to store the intermediate results. If a dataset is not tokenized, then the tokenizer needs to run every time training starts. HF datasets caches this automatically. However, if chat templates are providable, and dataset mixing is allowable, then how are all of these going to be cached?
- If a dataset is big, then it should be handled automatically for the user without a user needing to set `streaming:true`
- If its multimodal the mixing should also be handling for the user, maybe allowing the user to select some high-level parameters like mixing constants
- chat templates, response templates, etc, any preprocessing config should be just written out in the fine-grained config. This is along the lines of "code-as-documentation".
- we should search out other open source repos that does the simimilar thing, and discuss why we cant use them
- we should call out why a standard HF dataset is insufficient, and why we need to extend (to a `DataLoader` as you call it)
- the ADR should call out high-level goals of the design, like "there is a need to distributed preprocessing recipes. In the "Summary and Objectives" when things like "support Arrow formats" is listed out -> it shoudl be clarified that this is not because HF datasets does not support arrow formats, but t is because fms-hf-tuning forces users to provide json datasets (i know this is kind of implied very late in the ADR).
- I feel we should not invent new abstractions, if a `DataLoader`, as you call it, can be abstracted by a `DataSet`, then its better to go with the latter, since everybody is familiar with it. Less abstractions, the more unstable the code.
- the concepts of `DataHandlerConfig, DataConfig, DataLoaderConfig` are completely internal, and to some extent, is of lesser importance to the ADR, whereas the higher level concerns, like usability and architectural considerations, need to be first ironed out and clarified before going into internals.

Reviewer: I agree we need to talk about design more. I have expressed my dissatisfaction with it in some issues as well. We can discuss on a call next week

Reviewer: @ashokponkumar can we please move away from providing default configs to auto detection for standard use cases? Providing default configs is still very messy and confusing . 

- for advanced users it is fine to allow to customize, but for straightforward use cases , we need to shortlist what data formats we want to support in repo - **accept datasets as one argument -> call preprocessing and training as needed** 
- for users that want to pass multiple datasets and need sampling , they can use the config file, but again specifying data preprocessing function in the config need not be compulsory?

    splitter_arguments:
      test_size: 0
    data_paths:
      - /data/stackoverflow-kubectl_posts
      - /data/stackoverflow-kubernetes_posts
      - /data/stackoverflow-openshift_posts
    data_handlers:
      - name: render_template
        arguments:
          remove_columns: all
          batched: false
          fn_kwargs:
            jinja_template: "{<jinja-template>}"
  - name: dataset1
    sampling:
      ratio: 0.4
    data_paths:
      - /data/stackoverflow-kubectl_posts
      - /data/stackoverflow-kubernetes_posts
      - /data/stackoverflow-openshift_posts
    splitter_arguments:
      test_size: 1
    data_handlers:
      - name: render_template
        arguments:
          remove_columns: all
          batched: false
          fn_kwargs:
            jinja_template: "{<jinja-template>}"
  - name: dataset2
    sampling:
      ratio: 0.3
    data_handlers:

>       - name: apply_tokenizer_chat_template

Reviewer: @dushyantbehl @ashokponkumar doesnt SFT trainer add chat template on their own? https://huggingface.co/docs/trl/en/sft_trainer#dataset-format-support if dataset is of certain format . Chat is already supported by SFT trainer, since majority of your data handler examples given by you are applying templates, trying to understand use case

hugging face and stateful data loader (fms-fsdp implementation).
This is also` selected from the argument in the config `dataloader.type`

## How are handlers provided and registered - 

Data handlers are python callables which can be called on single/few samples of data and can perform
things like applying chat template, tokenising the data, applying tools like jinja template or even
things like encoding or decoding multi modal formats like images/audio for processing by the model.

The abstract data loader class provides a way to register datahandler against a `name` which is a string.
The data handler config `DataHandlerConfig` taken by `execute_data_handlers` represents a DAG of data handling
routines which are to be executed on the data. 

For standard HF API you can think of these as the HF Processing routines. Which could be Map/Filter/Select operations
We implement most of the routines as map and because of this even the tokenisation of data which is done today
in fms-hf-tuning via `tuning/utils/preprocessing_utils.py::get_preprocessed_dataset` can be retained as a data 
handler which performs tokenization.

> The implementation is flexible enough for users to specify their own implementation of data handling routines

Reviewer: users of product - i.e watsonX are not going to select what data handler to apply . Using tuning type and type of dataset , proper defaults have to be selected - watsonX is also not going to figure out , setting defaults is on us.

which can be called by the data loader as part of its execution.

To this end, one way to design is we can provide the users and API on like the one shown in the `Dataloader` class
which they can utilise to register custom data handlers, in this case however the user needs to use `fms-hf-tuning` as
a module but not via the implementation of its `main` functionality.

Please note that our implementation needs to support certain predefined built-in handlers like `apply_chat_template`
or `tokenize` which user can request just by a name.

For example see this implementation - https://github.ibm.com/ai4code-wisdom/platform/blob/main/modelops/modelops/train.py#L251

# Implementation of HuggingFace Data Loader.

HF Dataloader or a dataloader which used Hugging Face API is implemented as an instance of the `Dataloader` class.

When the dataloader goes through each `DataSetConfig`

> The HF dataloader implements functionality to process different type of files via its `load_dataset` factory.

Reviewer 2: It is not clear to me fi the plan is to implement a new `DataLoader` abstraction or what. I feel taht from a data standpoint, the abstraction interface should be the `DataSet` not the `DataLoader`. THis is because in `accelerate`, the It has its own `DataLoader` implementation. You dont want to touch that.

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/issues/31441

Author: This plan is not to superimpose on the data loader implementations of accelerate or others rather just to say that this internal abstraction will use HF/Accelerate API while other can implement data loaders which are experimental but not yet available in HF. 

Thanks for the pointer on the `StatefulDataloader` we can definitely evaluate that for our consideration but the idea to have a design like this is to allow flexibility of implementing custom dataloaders like the one in our `fms-fsdp` repo inside `fms-hf-tuning`.

Reviewer 2: I believe accelerate stance on the data loader is that it shouldn’t be user implemented. I feel you can cover most use cases by customising dataset, data collator, sampler or batch sampler. Do you have a use case where these are not sufficient

Reviewer: use case of custom dataloader is also not clear to me. Seems like from use cases you defined so far, we just need
1. preprocessing functions for selected data types like parquet,chat etc
2. code for sampling and thus mixing different formats of datasets in one training 

They do not warrant a new dataLoader. Also to mention a big reason of using standard HF APIs in this repo was simplicity and ease of maintenance. With the direction being - any new logic should be contributed to HF , so we can leverage standard APIs.

Reviewer: This section needs to be removed as agreed - no customization of DataLoaders themselves

If not supported automatically via this, we can look to extend the factory to use an other type of interest via
`Dataset.from_generator(<generator>)` functionality.

The reason to make use of HF factory is to keep our code simple and free of duplication with preexisting library code.

This also means that any implementation like `get_json_object` which load `json(l)` and then return a custom json dict
can be implemented as data handlers over basic json dataloader from HF.

### Splitting and Interleaving datasets

> Other argument such as `splitter_arguments` can be passed to HF [`datasets.test_train_split`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v3.0.1/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.train_test_split) to create a test/train split of

Reviewer: is this for creating validation dataset ?

Author: Yes, in case users want to split the data set via ratio.

[`datasets.interleave_datasets`](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v3.0.1/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.interleave_datasets).

### Streaming datasets

In case of Hugging Face Dataloader the `streaming` argument can be handled by using `IterableDatasets` instead of standard `Datasets`.
HF provides same APIs like `datasets.interleave_datasets` over the `Iterable` datasets as well.

Further important thing to note is in case of HF, if we use hugging face the `map` functionality which we use to implement data handling
is handled in a lazy fashion meaning we don't need to handle the data handlers in a different way for streaming data. [More Information on HF Page.](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/about_mapstyle_vs_iterable#eager-data-processing-and-lazy-data-processing)

## Handling data collators.

Data collators specifically for TRL use cases like chat based interactions which apply chat templates and proper attention masking on the
tokenized data like in the case of `DataCollatorForCompletionOnlyLM` handle a specific functionality on the data. In this design we consider two approaces for data collators.

> 

Reviewer 2: similarly, I feel you do not need to touch the `DataCollators` since they are part of the `DataLoader` abstraction.

Author: Agreed on that front, hence we also prefer the approach where we use preimplemented collators and no reimplement or break any api.

> 1. Implementing data collators as map.

Reviewer 2: I feel one simplification, is that if the dataset is preprocessed, then just use a datacollator that collates all the tokens like a `DataCollatorForSeq2Seq`. 

Once data is processed, you no longer need a fancy data collator anymore. All it needs to do is form the batch

    We explore this approach as all the processing of data by us is done in data handlers so to implement collators as data handlers 
    makes sense but is a hard problem to solve. Data collation happens at the very last stage of batch creation and is done in an async
    fashion because event the HF data collators like `DataCollatorForCompletionOnlyLM` or [`DataCollatorForSeq2Seq`](https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/blob/3f06f95ebe617b192251ef756518690f5bc7ff76/src/transformers/data/data_collator.py#L543) are passed to torch data loader by the HF APIs and is executed by the torch Dataloader.

    So implementing data collators as map means we need to disable [torch data collation and batching](https://pytorch.org/docs/stable/data.html#disable-automatic-batching) and perform it in our code, which we do not intend to experiment with due to its complexity.

1. Passing collators directly to SFTTrainer.

>     In the code collators are collected by `get_data_collator` functionality and passed to `SFTTrainer`. We can retain the same functionality

Reviewer: yes data collators have to be inferred for the dataset and arguments passed . it is better to infer it in code for labelled datasets

## Simplification of code and user configuration

The flexibility provided by this design is that it simplifies the configuration requirement for various use cases.
If chat template and chat style data is requested users can specify chat specific data handlers and not specify all configurations which are
not required.
This can also simplify configuration handling in the code. TODO: give example

## Handling Multi Modal Data.

HF does provide support for handling [image datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/image_process) and [audio datasets](https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/en/audio_load) which can be utilised by us in our HF dataloader.

The functionality listed by HF in implementing the use of image and audio datasets is `map` based functions to perform resize, encoding and other such operations on the dataset (see the link above).

This means the image and audio multi modal datasets will be compatible with our data handler routines. Once we have the data handling routines set we will allow users to train with multi modal datasets too.

> # Stateful Dataloader implementation.

Reviewer: this section needs to be removed as agreed, passing custom DataLoader adds complexity - if it is merged to accelerate , please use standard ones

Stateful dataloader refers to the `fms-fsdp` implementation of the dataloader by our colleagues Davis and Linsong.

Supporting stateful dataloader will mean refactoring the fms-fsdp implementation into our abstract `Dataloader` class.

In brief, things to consider here will be,

> 1. Data handler support needs to be added to the stateful data loader as we want lazy execution of handlers (as and when data is loaded).

Reviewer 2: its aI think accelerate v1.0 should already have stateful dataloader implemented if I recall correctly?
